---
layout: post
category : firmware
tags : [falconwing, linux, kernel, booting]
---
The bootloader has the potential to either be very easy to work with, or a
nightmare.  If you're very lucky, there's a copy of U-Boot running that has
access to your filesystem.  If you're very unlucky, there's no way to access
the bootloader at all.

Fortunately I've worked with this part before, so I'm familiar with its boot
sequence, as well as [some of its
quirks](http://cache.freescale.com/files/dsp/doc/errata/IMX23CE.pdf).  I'm
also lucky in that the part is old, and there are many projects documenting
every aspect of its boot sequence.  Also, the entirety of the boot code is
open-source, which is fantastic.

On the stock Falconwing ROM, the system uses a custom bootloader.  While we
could take advantage of this, the fact that we have a new machine ID means
that we'd need to modify it in order to allow it to boot our kernel.
Besides, the boot ROM contains enough code to boot and load our Linux
kernel, so why not take advantage of that, rather than using a chained
loader?

There's a bit of yak-shaving that needs to be done first.  We need to grab
elftosb, which is used to format binary files so that the ROM can load our
kernel.  We also need to grab the Freescale bootlets, which set up SD RAM,
battery charger, and clocks, and also format the Atags to be passed to the
kernel.  I pulled a copy of the bootlets from
[Timesys](http://repository.timesys.com/buildsources/i/imx-bootlets/imx-bootlets-10.12.01/),
but you can get them from anywhere.

For elftosb, I've decided I'd rather use the Rockbox reimplementation of
elftosb, because it was slightly easier to find.  Clone the Rockbox git repo
from git://git.rockbox.org/rockbox, go into rockbox/utils/imxtools/sbtools/,
type "make" and copy the resulting elftosb file to /usr/local/bin or put it
in your PATH.

Now, go to the uncompressed imx-bootlets source code.  Edit the command-line
file linux_prep/cmdlines/stmp378x_dev.txt and change the console line so
that it's "console=ttyAMA0,115200" -- this is the standard ARM debug console
name.  Modify linux_prep/include/mx23/platform.h and change MACHINE_ID to
match the assigned ID from the Linux ARM Machine Registry.  Copy
arch/arm/boot/zImage from the Linux kernel tree into the imx-bootlets
directory and compile everything by running "make".  It will fail when it
goes to run "elftosb", but that's okay.

Package up your own bitstream file by running:

    elftosb -c linux.bd -o imx23_linux.sb

Note that the command lacks the "-z" argument.  On EVK boards and most other
i.MX 23 devices, boot encryption is enabled.  Straight from the factory, the
key is all zeroes, so in order to get the file to boot you need to encrypt
the image with a key of all zeroes.  The "-z" argument does that.  The
Falconwing boards have encryption turned off, so that argument needs to be
omitted entirely.

One final step before the image is prepared: The SB image has to be padded
with 2048 bytes before it.  That's just how the ROM is.  So use "dd" to
create the actual boot image:

    dd if=imx23_linux.sb of=boot.bin seek=4

The file "boot.bin" is now usable as a boot image, and can be stored on an
SD card for booting.  The way the boot ROM finds the image is by looking on
the SD card for a DOS partition table, and then locating the first
partition of type 0x53.  Since the SD card bundled with the Hacker Board
has this partition table already set up, we can just write boot.bin out to
it and be done:

    cat boot.bin > /dev/disk4s1

Put the card into the Falconwing board, attach a serial cable, apply power,
and if you're very lucky the following text will appear:

    PowerPrep start initialize power...
    Battery Voltage = 0.20V
    No battery or bad battery detected!!!.Disabling battery voltage
    measurements.
    Aug  8 201215:35:38
    EMI_CTRL 0x1C084040
    FRAC 0x92926192
    init_ddr_mt46v32m16_133Mhz
    power 0x00820710
    Frac 0x92926192
    start change cpu freq
    hbus 0x00000003
    cpu 0x00010001
    Uncompressing Linux... done, booting the kernel.

The system boots, attempts to load the kernel, but fails.  On the plus side,
the bootloader is working now.  If you get a hex code instead of boot text,
consult
[IMX23_ROM_Error_Codes.pdf](http://forums.freescale.com/freescale/attachments/freescale/IMXCOMM/165/1/IMX23_ROM_Error_Codes.pdf).  It will tell you
what the code means, but you're on your own when it comes to figuring out
what's causing the error, and how to resolve it.

Next time we'll dig into the kernel guts, and try to figure out why it's not
booting.
